+++
title = "SIGHASH_NOINPUT"
date = 2017-02-28
weight = 118
in_search_index = true

[extra]
bip = 118
status = "Draft"
+++

      BIP: 118
      Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
      Title: SIGHASH_NOINPUT
      Author: Christian Decker <decker.christian@gmail.com>
      Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
      Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0118
      Status: Draft
      Type: Standards Track
      Created: 2017-02-28
      License: BSD-3-Clause

## Abstract

This BIP describes a new signature hash flag (`sighash`-flag) for segwit
transactions. It removes any commitment to the output being spent from
the signature verification mechanism. This enables dynamic binding of
transactions to outputs, predicated solely on the compatibility of
output scripts to input scripts.

## Motivation

Off-chain protocols make use of transactions that are not yet broadcast
to the Bitcoin network in order to renegotiate the final state that
should be settled on-chain. In a number of cases it is desirable to
react to a given transaction being seen on-chain with a predetermined
reaction in the form of another transaction. Often the reaction is
identical, no matter which transaction is seen on-chain, but the
application still needs to create many identical transactions. This is
because signatures in the input of a transaction uniquely commit to the
hash of the transaction that created the output being spent.

This proposal introduces a new sighash flag that modifies the behavior
of the transaction digest algorithm used in the signature creation and
verification, to exclude the previous output commitment. By removing the
commitment we enable dynamic rebinding of a signed transaction to
outputs whose `witnessProgram` and value match the ones in the `witness`
of the spending transaction.

The dynamic binding is opt-in and can further be restricted by using
unique `witnessProgram` scripts that are specific to the application
instance, e.g., using public keys that are specific to the off-chain
protocol instance.

## Specification

`SIGHASH_NOINPUT` is a flag with value `0x40` appended to a signature so
that the signature does not commit to any of the inputs, and therefore
to the outputs being spent. The flag applies solely to the verification
of that single signature.

The `SIGHASH_NOINPUT` flag is only active for segwit scripts with
version 1 or higher. Should the flag be used in a non-segwit script or a
segwit script of version 0, the current behavior is maintained and the
script execution MUST abort with a failure.

The transaction digest algorithm from BIP 143 is used when verifying a
`SIGHASH_NOINPUT` signature, with the following modifications:

`   2. hashPrevouts (32-byte hash) is 32 0x00 bytes`  
`   3. hashSequence (32-byte hash) is 32 0x00 bytes`  
`   4. outpoint (32-byte hash + 4-byte little endian) is`  
`      set to 36 0x00 bytes`  
`   5. scriptCode of the input is set to an empty script`  
`      0x00`

The `value` of the previous output remains part of the transaction
digest and is therefore also committed to in the signature.

The `NOINPUT` flag MAY be combined with the `SINGLE` flag in which case
the `hashOutputs` is modified as per BIP 143[^1]: it only commits to the
output with the matching index, if such output exists, and is a
`uint256` `0x0000......0000` otherwise.

Being a change in the digest algorithm, the `NOINPUT` flag applies to
all segwit signature verification opcodes, specifically it applies to:

-   `OP_CHECKSIG`

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   `OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY`

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   `OP_CHECKMULTISIG`

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   `OP_CHECKMULTISIGVERIFY`

## Binding through scripts

Using `NOINPUT` the input containing the signature no longer references
a specific output. Any participant can take a transaction and rewrite it
by changing the hash reference to the previous output, without
invalidating the signatures. This allows transactions to be bound to any
output that matches the value committed to in the `witness` and whose
`witnessProgram`, combined with the spending transaction\'s `witness`
returns `true`.

Previously, all information in the transaction was committed in the
signature itself, while now the relationship between the spending
transaction and the output being spent is solely based on the
compatibility of the `witnessProgram` and the `witness`.

This also means that particular care has to be taken in order to avoid
unintentionally enabling this rebinding mechanism. `NOINPUT` MUST NOT be
used, unless it is explicitly needed for the application, e.g., it MUST
NOT be a default signing flag in a wallet implementation. Rebinding is
only possible when the outputs the transaction may bind to all use the
same public keys. Any public key that is used in a `NOINPUT` signature
MUST only be used for outputs that the input may bind to, and they MUST
NOT be used for transactions that the input may not bind to. For example
an application SHOULD generate a new key-pair for the application
instance using `NOINPUT` signatures and MUST NOT reuse them afterwards.

## Deployment

The `NOINPUT` sighash flag is to be deployed during a regular segwit
script update.

## Backward compatibility

As a soft fork, older software will continue to operate without
modification. Non-upgraded nodes, however, will not verify the validity
of the new sighash flag and will consider the transaction valid by
default. Being only applicable to segwit transactions, non-segwit nodes
will see an anyone-can-spend script and will consider it valid.

## Acknowledgments

The `NOINPUT` sighash flag was first proposed by Joseph Poon in February
2016[^2], after being mentioned in the original Lightning paper[^3]. A
formal proposal was however deferred until after the activation of
segwit. This proposal is a continuation of this discussion and attempts
to formalize it in such a way that it can be included in the Bitcoin
protocol. As such we\'d like acknowledge Joseph Poon and Thaddeus Dryja
as the original inventors of the `NOINPUT` sighash flag, and its uses in
off-chain protocols.

## References

```{=html}
<references/>
```
## Copyright

This document is licensed under the BSD 3 Clause license.

[^1]: <https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0143.mediawiki>

[^2]: <https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2016-February/012460.html>

[^3]: <http://lightning.network/lightning-network.pdf>
