+++
title = "Generic Signed Message Format"
date = 2018-09-10
weight = 322
in_search_index = true

[extra]
bip = 322
status = "Draft"
+++

      BIP: 322
      Layer: Applications
      Title: Generic Signed Message Format
      Author: Karl-Johan Alm <karljohan-alm@garage.co.jp>
      Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
      Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0322
      Status: Draft
      Type: Standards Track
      Created: 2018-09-10
      License: CC0-1.0

## Abstract

A standard for interoperable signed messages based on the Bitcoin Script
format, either for proving fund availability, or committing to a message
as the intended recipient of funds sent to the invoice address.

## Motivation

The current message signing standard only works for P2PKH (1\...)
invoice addresses. We propose to extend and generalize the standard by
using a Bitcoin Script based approach. This ensures that any coins, no
matter what script they are controlled by, can in-principle be signed
for. For easy interoperability with existing signing hardware, we also
define a signature message format which resembles a Bitcoin transaction
(except that it contains an invalid input, so it cannot be spent on any
real network).

Additionally, the current message signature format uses ECDSA signatures
which do not commit to the public key, meaning that they do not actually
prove knowledge of any secret keys. (Indeed, valid signatures can be
tweaked by 3rd parties to become valid signatures on certain related
keys.)

Ultimately no message signing protocol can actually prove control of
funds, both because a signature is obsolete as soon as it is created,
and because the possessor of a secret key may be willing to sign
messages on others\' behalf even if it would not sign actual
transactions. No signmessage protocol can fix these limitations.

## Types of Signatures

This BIP specifies three formats for signing messages: *legacy*,
*simple* and *full*. Additionally, a variant of the *full* format can be
used to demonstrate control over a set of UTXOs.

### Legacy

New proofs should use the new format for all invoice address formats,
including P2PKH.

The legacy format MAY be used, but must be restricted to the legacy
P2PKH invoice address format.

### Simple

A *simple* signature consists of a witness stack, consensus encoded as a
vector of vectors of bytes, and base64-encoded. Validators should
construct `to_spend` and `to_sign` as defined below, with default values
for all fields except that

-   `message_hash` is a BIP340-tagged hash of the message, as specified
    below
-   `message_challenge` in `to_spend` is set to the scriptPubKey being
    signed with
-   `message_signature` in `to_sign` is set to the provided simple
    signature.

and then proceed as they would for a full signature.

### Full

Full signatures follow an analogous specification to the BIP-325
challenges and solutions used by Signet.

Let there be two virtual transactions `to_spend` and `to_sign`.

The `to_spend` transaction is:

`   nVersion = 0`  
`   nLockTime = 0`  
`   vin[0].prevout.hash = 0000...000`  
`   vin[0].prevout.n = 0xFFFFFFFF`  
`   vin[0].nSequence = 0`  
`   vin[0].scriptSig = OP_0 PUSH32[ message_hash ]`  
`   vin[0].scriptWitness = []`  
`   vout[0].nValue = 0`  
`   vout[0].scriptPubKey = message_challenge`

where `message_hash` is a BIP340-tagged hash of the message, i.e.
sha256\_tag(m), where tag = `BIP0322-signed-message`, and
`message_challenge` is the to be proven (public) key script.

The `to_sign` transaction is:

`   nVersion = 0 or as appropriate (e.g. 2, for time locks)`  
`   nLockTime = 0 or as appropriate (for time locks)`  
`   vin[0].prevout.hash = to_spend.txid`  
`   vin[0].prevout.n = 0`  
`   vin[0].nSequence = 0 or as appropriate (for time locks)`  
`   vin[0].scriptWitness = message_signature`  
`   vout[0].nValue = 0`  
`   vout[0].scriptPubKey = OP_RETURN`

A full signature consists of the base64-encoding of the `to_sign`
transaction in standard network serialisation.

### Full (Proof of Funds)

A signer may construct a proof of funds, demonstrating control of a set
of UTXOs, by constructing a full signature as above, with the following
modifications.

-   `message_challenge` is unused and shall be set to `OP_TRUE`
-   Similarly, `message_signature` is then empty.
-   All outputs that the signer wishes to demonstrate control of are
    included as additional inputs of `to_sign`, and their witness and
    scriptSig data should be set as though these outputs were actually
    being spent.

Unlike an ordinary signature, validators of a proof of funds need access
to the current UTXO set, to learn that the claimed inputs exist on the
blockchain, and to learn their scriptPubKeys.

## Detailed Specification

For all signature types, except legacy, the `to_spend` and `to_sign`
transactions must be valid transactions which pass all consensus checks,
except of course that the output with prevout `000...000:FFFFFFFF` does
not exist.

### Verification

A validator is given as input an address *A* (which may be omitted in a
proof-of-funds), signature *s* and message *m*, and outputs one of three
states

-   *valid at time T and age S* indicates that the signature has set
    timelocks but is otherwise valid
-   *inconclusive* means the validator was unable to check the scripts
-   *invalid* means that some check failed

#### Verification Process

Validation consists of the following steps:

1.  Basic validation
    1.  Compute the transaction `to_spend` from *m* and *A*
    2.  Decode *s* as the transaction `to_sign`
    3.  If *s* was a full transaction, confirm all fields are set as
        specified above; in particular that
        -   `to_sign` has at least one input and its first input spends
            the output of `</code>`{=html}to\_spend`</code>`{=html}
        -   `to_sign` has exactly one output, as specified above
    4.  Confirm that the two transactions together satisfy all consensus
        rules, except for `to_spend`\'s missing input, and except that
        *nSequence* of `to_sign`\'s first input and *nLockTime* of
        `to_sign` are not checked.
2.  (Optional) If the validator does not have a full script interpreter,
    it should check that it understands all scripts being satisfied. If
    not, it should stop here and output *inconclusive*.
3.  Check the \*\*required rules\*\*:
    1.  All signatures must use the SIGHASH\_ALL flag.
    2.  The use of `CODESEPARATOR` or `FindAndDelete` is forbidden.
    3.  `LOW_S`, `STRICTENC` and `NULLFAIL`: valid ECDSA signatures must
        be strictly DER-encoded and have a low-S value; invalid ECDSA
        signature must be the empty push
    4.  `MINIMALDATA`: all pushes must be minimally encoded
    5.  `CLEANSTACK`: require that only a single stack element remains
        after evaluation
    6.  `MINIMALIF`: the argument of `IF`/`NOTIF` must be exactly 0x01
        or empty push
    7.  If any of the above steps failed, the validator should stop and
        output the *invalid* state.
4.  Check the \*\*upgradeable rules\*\*
    1.  The version of `to_sign` must be 0 or 2.
    2.  The use of NOPs reserved for upgrades is forbidden.
    3.  The use of segwit versions greater than 0 are forbidden.
    4.  If any of the above steps failed, the validator should stop and
        output the *inconclusive* state.
5.  Let *T* by the nLockTime of `to_sign` and *S* be the nSequence of
    the first input of `to_sign`. Output the state *valid at time T and
    age S*.

### Signing

Signers who control an address *A* who wish to sign a message *m* act as
follows:

1.  They construct `to_spend` and `to_sign` as specified above, using
    the scriptPubKey of *A* for `message_challenge` and tagged hash of
    *m* as `message_hash`.
2.  Optionally, they may set nLockTime of `to_sign` or nSequence of its
    first input.
3.  Optionally, they may add any additional outputs to `to_sign` that
    they wish to prove control of.
4.  They satisfy `to_sign` as they would any other transaction.

They then encode their signature, choosing either *simple* or *full* as
follows:

-   If they added no inputs to `to_sign`, left nSequence and nLockTime
    at 0, and *A* is a Segwit address (either pure or P2SH-wrapped),
    then they may base64-encode `message_signature`
-   Otherwise they must base64-encode `to_sign`.

## Compatibility

This specification is backwards compatible with the legacy
signmessage/verifymessage specification through the special case as
described above.

## Reference implementation

TODO

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to David Harding, Jim Posen, Kalle Rosenbaum, Pieter Wuille,
Andrew Poelstra, and many others for their feedback on the
specification.

## References

1.  Original mailing list thread:
    <https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-March/015818.html>

## Copyright

This document is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal
license.

## Test vectors

TODO
